                                   Appendix 1

A HISTORY OF DISTRIBUTISM

Address to the Third Way International Conference

London 16 October 1994

By Anthony Cooney Editor of Liverpool Newsletter

I have been asked to speak today on the History of Distributism. If I were to
continue myself to a narrative history, I think that that could be disposed of
in short order. G.K's WEEKLY was launched in 1925 and the DISTRUBUTIST LEAGUE
was founded in 1926. It's chief activity, according to its critics, was holding
monthly meetings at Devereaux, where Distributists drove down in their motor
cars to discuss the abolition of machinery!

GK. Chesterton's contribution was the editing and financing of GL's WEEKLY. The
value of that journal is not to be underrated. It influenced the thinking of a
number of MP's ranging from High Tories such as Anthony Fell to Honest Labour
Men such as Simon Mahon. Perhaps the greatest success of GK's WEEKLY was the
exposure of the Mond Turner plot to govern Great Britain by a Fasces of
bankers, industrialists and TU bosses, and reduce Parliament to a Committee
Which Receives Reports. The plot was rejected by an altered House of Commons.

After GK's death in 1936 his paper became THE WEEKLY REVIEW and continued
publication until 1948. Assigned to expose the clandestine Fascists who
published that paper, Douglas Hyde, the news editor of The Daily Worker, was
converted by it to both Catholicism and Distributism. Distributism also played
a part in the conversion of Hamish Frazer, a member of the Communist Party's
National Executive and a formar commissar of the International Brigade. It is
perhaps noteworthy that both Bob Darke a leading London Communist and Jimmy
Reade of the Glasgow shipyards adopted Distributist ideas upon becoming
disillusioned with Communism.

In 1948, THE WEEKLY REVIEW became a monthly, called in reminiscence of cobbett,
The Register. When that too folded, Mr Aidan Mackey gallantly launched a little
monthly, called, first The Defendant and later The Distributist. It became a
quarterly in 1957 and ceased publication in 1959. It seemed that DISTRIBUTISM
had at long last been carted off to the bone yard of history.

Except for one thing. In 1954 a small group of Liverpool subscribers to THE
DISTRIBUTIST launched, a duplicated magazine called PLATFORM. They even took
their Distributism to the polls, contesting seats for the Liverpool City
Council. In January 1960, after the folding of the DISTRIBUTIST, Platform
became LIVERPOOL NEWSLETTER and has been published continuously ever since, and
from January 1995, beginning with Issue No 416 it will be placed in the safe
hands of THIRD WAY PUBLICATIONS and the editorship of Mr Kevin Aspen.

In 1981 as editor of Liverpool Newsletter I received a request from a new
journal NATIONAL CONSCIOUSNESS enquiring what exactly was this Distributism
which Liverpool Newsletter was always banging on about. The result was a series
of articles by myself, in that magazine, and in 1987 I was invited to
contribute an article to VANGUARD, the journal of the then National Front. You
will forgive me the vanity of supposing that those articles sowed the seeds of
the rebirth of Distributism which we see today.

That then is the narrative history of DISTRIBUTISM to-date, a tale soon told,
which looks forward to a brave sequal.

However I think you expect something more than a mere Chronicle. Distributism
is not a series of events, it is an IDEA and the history of ideas is always
complex.

The first thing to understand is that the IDEA of Distributism existed long
before the word was invented. As Sagar says in his little booklet Distributism

"The immediate point here, however, is that is seemed such a normal thing that
men did not think of naming it until it had been destroyed. Even then only a
few men saw it so clearly as to think it worthy of a particular name"

We might claim that the first Distributist was Aristotle. Rejecting the
communism of Plato's Republic he argues in his Politics, that:

"Property should be in a general sense common, but as a general rule private
... In well-ordered states, although every man has his own property, some
things he will place at the disposal of his friends, while of others he shares
the use of them"

We could say that the first Distributist law was that decree of the Roman
Senate which privided that a retired Legionary should not be granted more land
than he and his family could farm.

We might argue that Wat Tyler was the first English Distributist; leading a
peasants revolt against the re-imposition of Feudal dues by the great Magnates,
who needed the money to pay the Usurers interest.

I think however that in modern times we must name he whom Chesterton called

The horseman of the shires,

The trumpet of the Yeomanry,

The hammer of the Squires

the first exponent of what we now call Distributism , - William Cobbett, one of
the the greatest of Englishmen. Rusklin also belongs to us. His Gild of St
George was the first practical attempt to establish and defend small-holders
and master-craftsmen. William Morris's Arts and Crafts Movement, although
calling itself Socialist had much the same idea. To these might be added those
practical working men of Halifax and Huddersfield who saw that they could never
be free men whilst they lived in tied cottages, and who started the first
Building Societies to make themselves FREEHOLDERS. We may also cast our net to
take in the founders of both the Consumer and Industrial Co-operative Movement.

All these many strands were brought together at the beginning of the century by
A R Orage in the National Guilds Movement, which sought to establish ownership
by Gilds of workers on the Medieval model. It was in Orage's Mew Age that
Chesterton and Belloc first expounded the ideas which were to become knows as

Distributism , and it was in those pages also that the historic meeting between
Distributism and Social Credit took place. Orage described its impact in an
article in the Commonweal of 17/2/1926.

The doubts that haunted me regarding the practicability of National Guilds were
concerned with something more important than the viability of the idea ....
Somehow or other it would not work in my mind .... the trouble was always of
the same nature - the relation of the whole scheme to the existing, or any
prospective system of money ... one day there came into my office ... a man who
was destined to affect a beneficent revolution in my state of mind, Major C H
Douglas

Douglas has also written of the relationship between Distributism and Social
Credit:

"It is profoundly significant that what is now called Socialism and pretends to
be a movement for the improvement of the underprivileged, began as something
closely approaching the Distributism of Messrs Belloc and Cheserton, of which
the financial proposals embodied in various authentic Social Credit schemes
form the practical mechanism, although developed without reference to it
(Distributism). It (Socialism) was penetrated by various subversive bodies and
perverted into the exact opposite of Distributism - Collectivism"

It seem to me to be axiomatic that Distributed ownership cannot survive, much
less co-exist, with a centralised system of Debt Finance, as Belloc also
recognised when in The Essay on the Restoration of Property he wrote:

The bank credit at work being about ten minutes the actual deposits holds the
throttle valve of the whole economic machine. It is of no use attempting to
restore the institution of property here in England now until we have given the
small owner some power of reaction against this universal master.

Belloc indeed was here repeating the warning given by Pius XI in his sequal to
Leo X111's famous encyclical Rerum Novarum:

"n the first place it is patent that in our days not wealth alone is
accumulated but immense power and despotic economic domination are concentrated
in the hands of a few .... This domination is most powerfully exercised by
those who, because they hold and control money, ALSO GOVERN CREDIT AND
DETERMINE ITS ALLOTMNET .... so that no one can breathe against their will"

I would only add here that the means to break the Monopoly of Credit are thos
proposed by C H Douglas, to which Orage gave the name Social Credit.

Distributism, as Belloc insisted, places great emphasis upon the Land, upon the
widespread distributism of ownership of Land. That being so it has had,
inevitably, a close association with the Back to the Land movement; and with
Organic Husbandry. Distributists were Greens before anyone dreamed of that
label. Distributism however is not JUST a Back to the Land ideal, that must be
insisted upon.

Back in 1973 I was talking about Distributism to one of those Superior Persons
who inhabit the Conservative Party

It sounds like Back to the Oil Lamp Age was his supercillious response. A few
weeks later the only growth industry in Great Britain, thanks to his party and
the Abominable Heath, was candlemaking. People would have been glad of a few
oil lamps as they sat out the power cuts! Distrubutism makes no secret of the
fact that one of its chief objectives is the re-creation of a YEOMANRY, and
side by side with that a larger body of husbandmen, cultivating their own land.

Nevertheless we must beware of so emphasising the need for the re-population of
the land that we lay ourselves open to the charge that Distributism is a scheme
for driving everyone out of the towns and ordering them to grown their own
cabbages. We can leave schemes for PLAINER, LIVING, HIGHER THINKING AND MORE
PAINFUL DYING to Pol Pot and the 3rd and 4th Internationals!

Paradocically one task for Distributists is to STOP tonwnees buying cottages
and small holdings in rural areas for use as week-end cottages. That has put
the price of even the simplest home beyond the reach of young couples who
actually work on the land, and is driving them from it - AND THAT IS
DIABOLICAL! Scarcely less of an evil is the purchase of country homes by people
who commute to work in the cities, but whose only connection with the soil is
the planting of a lawn and a few apple trees.

The first task of Distributists is to lobby for legislation to assist those who
live and work on the land to remain there. A scheme to achieve these objectives
is given in a paper by C H Douglas entitled The ' Land for the People' Racket.

Only when we have staunched the flow from the land can we begin the real task
of re-settlement. Ultimately re-settlement will require two things - training
in how to live from the land whilst maintaining both its fertility and beauty
by good husbandry, and the bringing into cultivation of areas now wilderness.
John Seymour in his books The Fat of the Land, The Complete Guide to
Self-Sufficiency . Bring Me My Bow etc has shown that the first is possible: he
has shown it by doing it. Philip Oyler in such books as Feeding Ourselves and

The Generous Earth , has shown that the second is also possible. This is not
the time to go into detail, but broadly speaking, Oyler recommends a return to
the medieval system of land ownership known as strip farming as opposed to the
modern ring fence system. The ring fence system means that families live in
isolated farmhouses, far from doctors, midwives, schools and entertainment. It
means that some farms have chiefly good land and others chiefly poor land. The
strip system on the other hand means that families can be clustered together in
villages, and that each farm has its share of good and poor land.

Great Britain is NOT an over-populated country, compared to, say, Holland,
which is a food exporter, but it has a problem as Ruskin pointed out, of
maldistributism of population. For re-settlement of the New Lands

now wilderness, we must look to our young people, to their idealism, their
desire for endeavour, achievement and adventure. Taught the good husbandry that
John Seymour teaches, they can bring the wilderness back to fruitfulness,
changing perpaps its natural beauty for a more human kind, the kind praised by
that great pre-Distributist, Charles Kingsley in his poem to Tom Hughes:

Where's the mighty credit In admiring Alps? Any goose sees glory In their snowy
scalps Give me Bramshill Common St John's harriers by, Or the Vale of Windsor
England's golden eye. Show me life and progress, Beauty, health and MAN Homes
fair, trim gardens Turn where'er I can.

Before leaving this all important question of Distributism and the Land I will
merely point that there are many forms of Private Property - The doctor's,
solicitors or accountant's practice for example - we must defend them against
the community health centre and law centre beloved of the Marxists. There is
all manner of private property proper to industry and the town - from the
corner shop, the family run factory. I would not readily agree that ownership
of shares in a Joint Stock enterprise, much less, through Unit Trusts, amounts
to Distributism, but I would readily agree that railways owned by railwaymen
and coal-mines owned by miners, by means of a distributism of shares, would be
a form of Distributism, and a form suitable for all necessary large scale
industry.

What then is Distributism?

First of all it is not a programme or a scheme put the world right overnight.
It is not a Solution to all our problems , like Esperanto, phonetic spelling,
decimal coinage or, God help us. Comprehensive Education. Distributism is the
POLICY of a PHILOSOPHY.

That may not leve you much wiser at first hearing, for like all organic things,
Distributism demands study before it yields understanding.

We can ask three questions of any organisation or group which is pursuing an
idea.

WHAT? WHY? HOW?

What do you want to do?

Why do you think it is a good thing?

How are you going to do it?

The answer to the question What? will reveal a POLICY - action directed toward
particular OBJECTIVES.

The answer to the question Why? will describe a PHILOSOPHY - a way of seeing
the world, a way of seeing Man, a viewpoint of reality.

The answer to the question How? will be specification of METHODS for REALISING
the POLICY.

It is important to understand that EVERY policy is derived from a Philosophy.
Behind every course of action we observe there is a viewpoint of Reality; a
belief in how things SHOULD be. If a group is dedicated to getting people to go
to Church, they are not doing that because they are Atheists; they are doing it
because their viewpoint is Reality ist the Christian viewpoint. If a group are
promoting class hatred, they are not doing that simply because they are
unpleasant people - they are doing it because their viewpoing of Reality is the
Marxist viewpoint. The Philosophy which generates the Policy may be and often
is hidden, further a Philosophy may generate more than one Policy, and Policy
may be REALISED by more than one METHOD.

A policy is the APPLICATION of a Philosophy to the world we live in.
Distributism, like Social Credit, is APPLIED CHRISTIANITY. It is for
DISTRIBUTISTS to devise the Methods, in response to ever changing circumsances,
by which the POLICY may be REALISED.

Perhaps the most explicit statement of Distributism as a POLICY is that
contained in the encylical letter of Leo X111, Rerum Novarum, which simply
means, OF NEW THINGS . Leo X111 first states that the right to property
derives, not from any man made law or human convention, but from the Law of
Human Nature. It resides in the nature of language and its future tense, that
Man is the only creature who is both aware of the future and who can structure
it through language. Because of this man can provide not only for his own
future, but for that of his children and his childrens' children, by
bequeathing property. Property, Leo X111 says, is PROPER to Man.

The encyclical then examines the New Things, Capitalism and Socialism.
Capitalism is found to be an abuse of Property, a deprivation of the many by
the few. It has imposed A yoke little better than slavery

It is significant that the language used to describe Capitalism is far stronger
than that used to denounce Socialism, for Socialism is denounced. It is not
merely an abuse of, but is CONTRARY to Natural Right. Leo X111 concludes his
examination of Socialism with a prophetic warning of the misery it will bring
upon Manking if it is imposed.

What then is the solution to the problems created by these New Things? Leo X111
says that there is a way that accords with the Law of Human Nature, a Proper
Way, and that way is to achieve widespread ownership of property - ideally by
every family in the land. This is what he says:

"We have seen therefore that this great labour question cannot be solved save
by assuming as a principle that private ownership must be held sacred and
inviolable. The law, therefore should favour ownership, and its policy should
be to induce as many as possible of the people to become owners ... if working
people can be encouraged to look forward to obtaining a share in the land, the
gulf between vast wealth and sheer poverty will be bridged ... A further
consequence will be the greater abundance of the fruits of the earth. Men
always work harder and more readily when they work on that which belongs to
them; nay, they learn to love the very soil that yields ... not only food but
an abundance of good things for themselves and those who are dear to them ...
men would cling to the country of their birth, for no-one would exchange his
country for a foreign land if his own afforded him the means of living a decent
and happy life. These important benefits however can be reckoned on, ONLY
PROVIDED THAT A MAN'S MEANS BE NOT DRAINED BY EXCESSIVE TAXATION". (para 35)

It was Rerum Novarum which inspired Belloc to begin his search for a new
solution to old problems. It is our good fortune that in company with two men
of genius and a score of others of exceptional ability, he found it. It is
called DISTRIBUTISM or THE THIRD WAY. Rose Cottage, 17 Hadassah Grove, Lark
Lane, Liverpool, L17 8XH.

